Shrimp Étouffée
Our recipe for this classic Cajun stew includes homemade shrimp stock, giving it a full flavor that's sure to satisfy any étouffée enthusiast.

By Hank Shaw
Updated November 18, 2024
40 Ratings
Print
Hank Shaw

Jump to recipe
Even though I grew up in New Jersey and my mother is from New England, I still think Louisiana has the best food in America.

Every time I cook Cajun or Creole cuisine I'm in awe of the balance and strength in the cooking there; it's one of the few places in the United States with a long-standing cuisine all its own.

This dish, shrimp étouffée, is one of that cuisine's crown jewels.

how to make etouffee with shrimp
Elise Bauer
What Is Étouffée?
Étouffée basically means "smothered," and it is a common cooking technique in the South; a fricassee is the same deal. You make a flavorful sauce and cook a meat or fish in it, not so long as a braise or stew, and not so short as a sauté.

Shrimp étouffée brings together all of the hallmarks of Louisiana cooking: seafood (help our own shrimpers by making sure you use Gulf shrimp for your étouffée), a flour-and-oil roux, the "Holy Trinity" of onion, celery and green pepper, traditional Cajun seasoning and hot sauce.

Shrimp Etouffee
Elise Bauer
The Étouffée Dispute
Debates rage over whether étouffée ought to have a roux in it, whether you can use more than one seafood (wouldn't that be a gumbo, then?), and whether to use tomato or not. We went with a roux, one seafood, Tabasco, and no tomato. You can alter this recipe to suit your own preferences.

You'll note the long prep time in this recipe—that is mostly for peeling the shrimp shells for the stock and then for simmering that stock. If you use canned or pre-made stock, your prep time will go down to about 20 minutes.

Want More Great Recipes From Louisiana?
Shrimp Gumbo with Andouille Sausage
Oyster Stew
Slow Cooker Jambalaya
Bread Pudding
Chicken Gumbo with Andouille Sausage
Creole Spaghetti
Shrimp Etouffee
Elise Bauer
Print

Save
Shrimp Étouffée
Prep Time
20 mins
Cook Time
35 mins
Optional Homemade Stock
45 mins
Total Time
100 mins
Servings
4 to 6 servings
You can use shrimp, crawfish, or crab for this recipe interchangeably.

Cook Mode (Keep screen awake)
Ingredients
For the optional shrimp stock

Shells from 2 pounds of shrimp
1/2 large onion, chopped
Top and bottom from 1 green pepper
2 garlic cloves, chopped
1 celery rib, chopped
5 bay leaves
For the étouffée

1/4 cup vegetable oil or lard
1/4 heaping cup flour
1 large rib celery, chopped
1 green bell pepper, chopped
1 to 2 jalapeño peppers, chopped
1/2 large onion, chopped
4 garlic cloves, chopped
1 pint shrimp stock, clam juice, or fish stock
1 tablespoon Cajun seasoning
1/2 teaspoon celery seed
1 tablespoon sweet paprika
Salt
2 pounds shrimp, peeled (save the shells for shrimp stock)
3 green onions, chopped
Hot sauce, such as Crystal or Tabasco, to taste
Method
Make the optional shrimp stock:
If you don't already have prepared stock, pour 2 quarts of water into a pot and add all the shrimp stock ingredients. Bring to a boil, drop the heat down and simmer the stock gently for 45 minutes. Strain through a fine-meshed sieve into another pot set over low heat.

You will only need about 2 cups of stock for this recipe. Use the leftover stock for soup, risotto, etc. It will last in the fridge for a week or frozen for up to three months.

Make the roux:
Heat the vegetable oil or lard in a heavy pot over medium heat for 1 to 2 minutes. Stir in the flour, making sure there are no clumps. Let this cook, stirring often, until it turns a very brown, about 10 minutes or so.

making the roux for shrimp etouffee
Elise Bauer
Add the vegetables:
Add the celery, green pepper, jalapeño and onion, mix well and cook over medium heat for 4 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add the garlic and cook another 2 minutes.

cooking vegetables for etouffe recipe
Elise Bauer
Slowly add the shrimp stock, then the seasonings and the shrimp:
Measure out 2 cups of the shrimp stock and slowly add it a little at a time, stirring constantly so it incorporates. The roux will absorb the stock and seize up at first, then it will loosen. Add additional stock as needed to make a sauce about the thickness of syrup.

How to Thicken Sauce
READ MORE:
adding shrimp stock to etouffee
Elise Bauer
cooking shrimp stock for etouffee
Elise Bauer
Add the Cajun seasoning, celery seed and paprika and mix well. Add salt to taste, then mix in the shrimp. Cover the pot, turn the heat to its lowest setting and cook for 10 minutes.

cajun shrimp added to etouffee pot
Elise Bauer
Finish and serve:
Add the green onions and hot sauce to taste. Serve over white rice with a cold beer or lemonade.

Did you enjoy this recipe? Let us know with a rating and review!

making shrimp etouffee in pot
Elise Bauer
Cajun and Creole
Mardi Gras
Shrimp
Cajun and Creole









Creole Shrimp Gumbo with Andouille Sausage served in a shallow bowl

Shrimp Gumbo with Andouille Sausage
105 mins
How to Make Jambalaya in the Slow Cooker

Slow Cooker Jambalaya
4 hrs
Chicken Gumbo with Sausage

Chicken Gumbo with Andouille Sausage
3 hrs
Oyster Stew

Oyster Stew
30 mins
Plated shrimp creole with rice

Shrimp Creole
60 mins
Classic Shrimp Po Boy Sandwich on a Plate

Shrimp Po Boy Sandwich
35 mins
A Platter Filled with Oyster Po' Boys, Surrounded by a Kitchen Towel and a Bowl of Remoulade 

Oyster Po’ Boy
35 mins
Dirty Rice With Shrimp in a Dutch Oven Surrounded by Glasses of Water and a Plate With Utensils

Dirty Rice with Shrimp
45 mins



New Orleans Beignets
35 mins
Plate of the best lobster roll recipe served with a side of chips and a lemon wedge.

Classic New England Lobster Rolls
15 mins
Best Cioppino recipe

Cioppino
75 mins
Fish Po' Boy

Fish Po’ Boy
60 mins
Bowl of Classic New England Chowder with a Spoon

Classic New England Clam Chowder
45 mins
Clambake on platters with dirnks and melted butter on the side

How to Do a New England Clambake at Home
30 mins
Shrimp and grits on a white plate

Shrimp and Grits
65 mins
Egg Foo Young on a Plate with Jasmine Rice at a Table Setting with Chopsticks on a Napkin and a Pot of Sauce

Egg Foo Young
30 mins
Ready to cook?
Sign up for our weekly newsletters!
Email Address
Enter your email
Sign up
Let's be friends!
Recipes
Quick & Easy
In the Kitchen
Buying Guides
Holidays & Seasons
About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Sweepstakes
Privacy Policy
Contact
Your Privacy Choices 
Access TRUSTe's Enterprise Privacy Certification program
Simply Recipes is part of the People Inc. publishing family.